Write a document for Vetomint (#290)
postech-dao/simperby: docs/vetomint.md

# Vetomint

## Summary

Vetomint is a proof-of-stake, byzantine fault tolerant consensus algorithm
designed to meet the special needs of Simperby. As its name suggests, Vetomint
is a modification of Tendermint. It is designed to support voting in the
consensus level, achieving low network communication complexity. Moreover, Vetomint
is designed with the self-hosted nature of Simperby in mind, thereby runs under
long timeout intervals, possibly a few days long, without performance penalty.
The modifications applied to Tendermint, and the resulting properties of
Vetomint are summarized below:

### Behaviors

> 1. Validators may cast nil prevotes before the timeout expiration to vote on the
> rejection of the proposal.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Validators may cast nil prevotes before the timeout expiration to vote against
the proposal.
```

the same, and make the prevote in Tendermint real *vote*.

## Modifications to Tendermint

In order to realize the idea, we have applied several modifications to Tendermint,
which are summarized as follows: (1) in Vetomint, validators can veto
syntactically valid blocks; (2) if a validator receives 5/6 of the total
prevotes on a proposal, then it moves to the next phase immediately without
waiting for a timeout expiration. In addition, we have changed Tendermint so
that a block proposer remains the same unless explicitly dismissed, for better
usability.

### Nil Prevotes before Timeout Expiration

First, validators in Vetomint can cast nil prevotes before the timeout
expiration. These nil prevotes are used to reject block proposals.

This change allows voting on the consensus level. Unlike Tendermint, a validator
of Vetomint can reject a block proposal based on its content, even if the block
is syntactically valid.  In the same vein, proposals in Vetomint should be
thought as collections of agendas subject to vote.  For example, a proposer may
broadcast a block proposal that contains a transaction that withdraws some amout

> of money from the group's treasury.  Validators who agree on the withdrawl

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of money from the group's treasury. Validators who agree on the withdrawl
```

should cast prevotes to the proposal, and those who disagree should cast nil
prevotes.

<!---
TODO: Elaborate on this.
The following text is fine for giving intuition, but contains subtle errors.
Intuitively speaking, abusing the nil prevote in the original Tendermint means
nothing more than having a wrong clock.
-->
The safety condition will be preserved by this modification.  That is, no two
validators in the same height will decide on different block proposals.
Intuitively speaking, abusing the nil prevote in the original Tendermint means

> nothing more than having a wrong clock.  Under the asynchronous setting of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
nothing more than having a wrong clock. Under the asynchronous setting of
```

> Tendermint, this does not affect the safety.  We will discuss about the liveness

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tendermint, this does not affect the safety. We will discuss about the liveness
```

issue. For example, it might be the case where the half of validators accept a
proposal while the other half reject it. In such a case, in the original
Tendermint, although all validators have made decisions, validators can do
nothihg but wait for the pending timeout expiration, which can be intolerably
long.

To prevent such issues, we add a new early termination rule to Tendermint. If a
validator collects more than 5/6 of the total prevotes, either accepting ones or
rejecting ones, it makes progress to the next phase, depending on the prevotes
it has received so far. That is, among the received prevotes, if accepting
prevotes are more than 2/3 of the total prevotes, the validator broadcasts a
precommit to the proposal (i.e., an accepting precommit), and broadcasts a nill
precommit otherwise.

The threshold of 5/6 is chosen carefully. To demonstrate this, consider the
following extreme case where the threshold is 2/3 (thresholds less than 2/3 or
greater than 1 are meaningless). Suppose that an inarguably acceptable block is
proposed, and all but one malicious validator, who is trying to delay the
consensus, agree on the proposal. In the desirable scenario, the malicious

> action should be effectively ignored. However, we can easly see that the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
action should be effectively ignored. However, we can easily see that the
```

malicious validator has a high probability of hindering the consensus simply by
broadcasting a nil prevote. All validators that receive the nil prevote before
the early termination will (conservatively) assume that a quorum has been failed

> to met (because the received accepting prevotes are less than 2/3). In short,

Reviewer: I quite can't fully understand the reasoning in this sentence. I thought early termination only considers the total prevotes, not whether it is accepting or not.

Reviewer: Discussed in Discord, well understood.
https://discord.com/channels/941206496203669545/1049619693020905542/1064427038687121479

> to met (because the received accepting prevotes are less than 2/3). In short,

Author: Yes, it is for the threshold of 2/3

> to met (because the received accepting prevotes are less than 2/3). In short,

Author: I have elaborated on it in the new version.

2/3 threshold makes the system too sensitive.

To further explain the importance of the choice of 5/6, we will present an
(informal) argument to show that it is the optimal threshold. Let $x$ be the
early termination threshold. We will demonstrate that $x = 5/6$ is optimal.

First, the early termination rule is intended to prevent the consensus from
getting stuck by timeout, as long as all non-byzantine validators particpate
promptly. To achieve this, the byzantine threshold must be no greater than
$1-x$. If it were greater, byzatine validators could hinder the consensus by
simply not broadcasting prevotes.

Second, we want to ensure that, if more than 2/3 of the validators agree on a
proposal, the proposal will be accepted regardless of the actions of malicious
validators or the way messages are transferred. (The 2/3 condition is necessary

> for the safety of the subsequent Tendermint phases.) Suppose that 2/3  of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for the safety of the subsequent Tendermint phases.) Suppose that 2/3 of the
```

validators have agreed on a proposal, and suppose further that $1-x$ byzantine
validators falsely broadcast nil prevotes. If $$(1-x) + (2/3 - \epsilon) \ge x$$
for some small $\epsilon > 0$, then a validator that receives $1-x$ nil prevotes
from byzantine validators and $2/3 - \epsilon$ accepting prevotes will early
terminate and incorrectly conclude that the proposal has been rejected. This is
undesirable, so we must have   $$(1-x) + (2/3 - \epsilon) < x$$, which
simplifies to $x \ge 5/6$. As we want to minimize the byzantine threshold as
much as possible, the optimal choice is $x = 5/6$, and the byzantine threshold
would be $1-x = 1/6$.

Liveness is not ensured in Vetomint. However, this is not a design mistake of
Vetomint, but rather an inherent issue with the threshold-based decision making:
consensus on agendas without definite answers is not guaranteed to terminate.
However, we can still ensure that malicious validators cannot hinder the
consensus if a block that all non-byzantine validators agree on is proposed. In
other words, liveness is guaranteed assuming that unanimously acceptable blocks

> are eventually prpopsed infinitely often.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
are eventually proposed infinitely often.
```

# Vetomint

## Summary

> Vetomint is a proof-of-stake, byzantine fault tolerant consensus algorithm

Author: ok

designed to meet the special needs of Simperby. As its name suggests, Vetomint
is a modification of Tendermint. It is designed to support
displacing a designated consensus leader for arbitrary reasons via voting.

> Moreover, Vetomint is designed with the self-hosted nature of Simperby in mind,

Author: I understand what you means, but I think the term `lightweight node operation` seems misleading.
It sounds like we are aiming to optimize CPU resource consumed by node operation.

I changed the sentence to the following. How about this?
> Moreover, Vetomint is designed with the self-hosted nature of Simperby in mind,
thereby runs under long timeout intervals
without performance penalty,
so that validators 
can run their nodes only occasionally.

And I also suggest to replace the expression in the protocol overview document to something else.

> Moreover, Vetomint is designed with the self-hosted nature of Simperby in mind,

Reviewer 3: Good to go.

thereby runs under long timeout intervals, possibly a few days long, without
performance penalty.
The modifications applied to Tendermint, and the resulting properties of
Vetomint are summarized below:

### Behaviors

1. Validators may cast nil prevotes before the timeout expiration to vote against

> the proposal.  

Author: ok

2. If a validator collects more than 5/6 of the

> prevotes (either nil or nonnil ones), it immediately stops and casts a precommit

Author: ok

based on the votes it has collected so far.

### Properties

1. The byzantine threshold is $<1/6$.  
2. If all non-byzantine validators cast
prevotes/precommits before the timeout expiration, the system is never blocked

> by timeout.  

Author: I understand your concern about the asynchronicity, but
I don't understand the suggested phrase.

How about this?

> 2. Assuming that all non-byzantine validators cast prevotes/precommits and the
messages are delivered before the timeout expiration, the system is never
blocked by timeout.

> by timeout.  

Reviewer 3: Good, but how about re-emphasizing that we are considering timeout-by-dispute? Reader might get confused like "how does timeout ever happens if the network's fine?" This would work:
> Assuming that all non-byzantine validators cast prevotes/precommits and the messages are delivered before the timeout expiration, the system is never blocked by timeout because of possible disuptes.

> by timeout.  

Author: seems good to me.
I fixed it as follows:
> 2. Assuming that all non-byzantine validators cast prevotes/precommits and the
messages are delivered before the timeout expiration, the system is never
blocked by timeout by possible disuptes.

3. If all non-byzantine validators prevote on a proposal, then the
proposal will be accepted.

> 

Reviewer 2: Some recent papers distinguish between safety threshold and liveness threshold (e.g. "Multi-Threshold Byzantine Fault Tolerance". CCS 2021). 
So how about naming this property as "safety threshold => 1/3 and liveness threshold => 1/6"?

> 

Reviewer 3: @byeongjee are you ok with his suggestion?

> 

Author: Oh, I missed this comment. I agree with @P1n3tree and update it shortly.

> 

Author: fixed

## Motivation

The main goal of Vetomint is to give validators an option to displace the
designated consensus leader by a voting-like procedure.
Validators in Vetomint are allowed to vote on the displacement of the current
consensus leader, even before the block proposal.

The fundamental reason for this need is the adoption of the stable leader policy
of Simperby.  
That is, the leader is expected to remain the same (in contrast to the
round-robin based leader selection in typical PoS consensus protocols) unless it
is displaced explicitly.  
Since all validators of Simperby are designed to run their own nodes and
Simperby puts significant burden on proposers (see [protocol
overview](./protocol_overview.md)), the stable leader policy significantly
improves the usability.  
Unlike all other validators that turn on their node occassionally for voting,
the leader should stay its node turned on for on-demand block production and
managing the chatting service.  
Not all validators are willing to take this burden, so it is desirable to choose

> a few volunteers and let them be the leaders, stably.

Author: Practically most validators, except for few validators in the top of the list, will never be selected as leaders, so I'm not sure if it is worth to mention about the predictability part.

> not only the probability of non-first-leader becoming the leader is low, but also the variance becomes low too.

I think the 'probability' argument itself is strong enough, and I don't feel there is any special reason to discuss about the 'variance'.
It makes the argument unnecessarily complex.

Maybe it's worth to add a disclaimer that all validators can be leaders in fallback scenarios, but it is very unlikely to happen,
if this is what you mean.

> a few volunteers and let them be the leaders, stably.

Reviewer 3: I agree. This is too complicated. Let's just skip.

phases.)
Suppose that 2/3 of the validators have casted nonnil prevotes, and suppose
further that $1-x$ byzantine validators falsely broadcast nil prevotes.
If $$(1-x) + (2/3 - \epsilon) \ge x$$ for some small $\epsilon > 0$, then a
validator that receives $1-x$ nil prevotes from byzantine validators and
$2/3 - \epsilon$ accepting prevotes will early terminate and incorrectly
conclude that the leader has been displaced.
This is undesirable, so we must have   $$(1-x) + (2/3 - \epsilon) < x$$, which
simplifies to $x \ge 5/6$.
As we want to minimize the byzantine threshold as much as possible, the optimal
choice is $x = 5/6$, and the byzantine threshold would be $1-x = 1/6$.

Liveness is not ensured in Vetomint. However, this is not a design mistake of
Vetomint, but rather an inherent issue with the threshold-based decision making:
of course, if validators repeatedly displace leaders, then a block will not be
created at all.
However, we can still ensure that malicious validators cannot hinder the
consensus if all non-byzantine validators decide not to cast nil-prevote.
In other words, liveness is guaranteed assuming that all non-byzantine

> validators cast nonnil prevotes infintely often.

Author: yes, you're right, but could you elaborate on your suggestion?

> validators cast nonnil prevotes infintely often.

Reviewer 3: all non-byzantine validators cast non-nil prevotes once, or finite times in case of network asynchrony?
